Yeah, I guess
I'm saying a big family in contrast to what exists
now. We're such a big organization now that we kind
of feel, I think, separate in our own more strongly
with others in our own fields outside of our own
institutions than we do even sometimes in our own
institutions. I feel that here. And I was out of
Scripps a couple of years ago on sabbatical, and I
felt it there, too. Quite different from what it
used to be. Probably associated with the bigness
of the field. 200 research staff here and 200 or 300
at Scripps. Right. So it's a big field, at least
among the big institutions. Not big compared to
other fields, but I feel the bigness of it now
compared to what it used to be. And we're kind of
split off into our separate disciplines to a large
extent. So we've lost a little bit of that kind of
perhaps adventuresome togetherness kind of
spirit that we used to have. we're doing more
specialized things more detailed things that are
still exciting i feel so where should i go from here
well uh so i only have one question about revel
about this time revel is coming under a great deal
of criticism concerning administration of
scripps institution of oceanography uh and and i
take it that was not your impression at all working
with him or i didn't have that feeling he uh i think
rogers way of organizing scripts, which
essentially set the pattern for scripts to the
present day, was to bring in really good people and
let them really work on their own thing. And that
perhaps created some animosities among these
really good people. They were competing to some
extent for funds and position in the university,
and perhaps power to some extent. I didn't get
involved with that too much in my own research. At
least, I didn't feel it too much. Perhaps because I
was working under Russ Raitt, who didn't have very
many of those aspirations, I don't think. I didn't
feel those pressures very much. But I knew these
undercurrents were running its roots. I could see
them around me. Well, I have the impression, may I
be accurate, that as a matter of fact, if I may use
the term, all the great men who ran the good
institutions about this time, went through that,
that is both Lamont and here at Woods Hole, that
they tended to bring money down sort of in a block,
sort of just give it to you and ask you what you could
do and then come back a couple years later and check
and if you did it okay and if you didn't you were
gone. Did you prefer it to operate that way? Yeah,
that was nice for me as a graduate student, because
it means I didn't have to scramble for my own
funding. Like now, I'd probably have to write a
research proposal to get funding. And I didn't
have any need to do that at the time. Some money just
sort of came to me through professors who wanted
this job done. And I said, here, you have this
amount of money. Why don't you go out and see what
you can do with this instrumentation? And
essentially we went to see, you know, funded. And
there it was. You're right. The money was a lot
easier then. But we had to produce. Partly because
in addition to the rivalry among research
interests and scripts, there was also an intense
rivalry between institutions. Like Scripps
wanted to do a better job than Lamont in seismic
refraction, or heat flow, or whatever it might be,
or Woods Hole. And there was always that
competition, I think, for the federal dollar
going on at the institutions. I think that helped
bring Oceania to being all great fast. Because
these great men, Ravel, Ewing, and Islam, maybe,
here, and Woods Hope, who was more a physical
oceanographer, helped really get the thing
going. They were the leaders. They were
definitely leaders, something we don't see so
much of anymore, either nationally or even in our
institutions, I think, to some extent. We have
directors, but not necessarily leaders. Right.
Well, it might be, you know, that It's more
difficult as the scholarly world has become more
specialized to find someone with a broad-based
background to lead an institution. I'm struck by
your comments, for example, which appeared again
and again in interviews, that each of you have
become, in effect, more specialized, less of a
general oceanographer. Would you agree with
that? I think that's to some extent true. We
haven't, hardly any of us, been able to keep up with
all the new developments in oceanography. So in a
relative sense, we've all become specialists to
some extent. We may have been more generalists in
the past just because there wasn't as much to know
about. I think that's true. But I kind of started
out as a specialist. I wasn't really a generalist
like Ravel. I think he always tried to impress on us
the need for being a general oceanographer. And
all the courses that we took at Scripps were
directed toward that way. We took courses in
biology, physical oceanography, chemistry,
geology, and geophysics. That was required of all
students to take those at Scripps, as it is here,
too. So we try to get every student at least get
You didn't get involved with all the fields of
research. You were in your own field, even at that
time, 1956, when I started. I was a specialist in
geology, geophysics of the oceans. And that
perhaps limits one's abilities to comprehend all
of oceanography. I think that's true. I feel that.
So then you decided to leave Scripps and go to
UNESCO. Yes. A career change. Sort of a career
change, although I was always intending to do it as
a temporary thing to see how I liked the
administration of the ocean. This was an
administrative job. I wasn't doing any more of my
own research. I didn't pretend that I was going to
do that for the next couple of years. I had a
two-year appointment to get us going. And I
thought that would help broaden me, and I think it
did, to expose me to a lot of people working in
oceanography, although it didn't expose me as
much as I'd hoped to the working oceanographer. It
exposed me to more of the administrator and the
politician in oceanography. responsible for
meetings of the IOC, the International
Oceanographic Commission, in addition to
carrying out a program of assisting countries in
oceanographic research, maybe developing
countries who are just getting their
oceanographic programs started. I was one of four
persons in that office.
I had a Russian boss, Konstantin Fedorov, and a
German and a Japanese colleague who worked with me
in the office for those two years. Gahil Temple,
who's now at Keel, and Takenuchi, who's somewhere
in Japan now. I don't know where he is.
Meteorological agency or something like that. He
was a physical oceanographer. And I was a
geologist, geophysicist, and Hempo was a
biologist. And better off, our director was also a
physical oceanographer. So I was the only
geologist. But I got involved in all fields of
oceanography in that department meeting,
administratively. So the frustrating thing
about UNESCO was that the time constant of doing
things was so long that by the time I'd been there
for two years, half the projects I started hadn't
been finished. And I felt kind of frustrated in
that. I enjoyed the time there and interacting
with a lot of people, but I felt strongly the need to
get back into my own research activity, too. So I
decided in 1966 that I really had had enough of
ministering oceanography on an international
basis and I wanted to get back into my own research
fields here in Woods Hole, which I did. And I got
back here again into heat cell research and had had
a fairly major program here for the past 10 or 12
years, 10 or 11 years. How long have I been here?
Sixty-six. Yeah, 11 years. And have been
continuing that work here. And I, you know, it's
been a very pleasant experience. When I look back
on the time, it looks like, you know, what's
happened to the past 20 years. I don't know. It's
like, well, I think that's true of any field that
you enjoy. And I've gotten myself involved with
some other geophysical fields at the same time.
Some electromagnetic induction research, which
is a new kind of field coming along. We're getting
that started here at Woods Hole. I've been
involved with it for three or four years now. And
that's directed to... looking at electrical
conductivity in the oceans, beneath the oceans,
as a function of depth, trying to understand what
the temperature and chemical structure might be
beneath the oceans. But you could see Woods Hole is
similarly organized to Scripps, but not quite the
same. The main differences are here, I think, that
we tended partly from the characters of the people
here, to be more tightly directed. That is, the
geophysics department, partly for historical
reasons, tended to do things as a group. We went out
on cruises as a group. And I was in on some of these
when I first came here, not so much lately. But you
went to sea as a geophysics group rather than, as I
mentioned in my first group of scripts, as
physical oceanographers, geologists,
biologists, et cetera. Tend to be more of a
discipline oriented research group here. And we
were just starting to get organized by
departments here at Woods Hole. compared to
Scripps, which had a long, long organization
structure. I think Woods Hole is just somewhat
behind in getting organized compared to Scripps.
Woods Hole didn't exist before 1930, and Scripps
existed way back until the early 1900s as a marine
biological station. Almost all of the
oceanographic institutions started off in
biology. That's right. Which is interesting.
Very few started out as geological institutions,
with a few exceptions. I don't know how the others
did. Anyway, I think now we're seeing a time of
intense competition for research dollars right
now. I'm feeling it. Everybody's feeling it. It's
not quite so enjoyable as it used to be when you have
to really beg for your dollars. But I think
everybody here feels the enjoyment of working at
sea. One thing I find here, I was at Scripps a couple
of years ago on sabbatical. I just went back for a
year to participate in some of these
electromagnetic induction studies with Jim Cox
at Scripps.
with a separate group at Scripps, not very
directed compared to one here, which might
involve the whole of the physics department. But I
found that one of the differences between here and
Scripps was the
way in which, how do I describe
it? that Scripps is kind of a bigger place now that
involves the whole university. And people are
involved from the university in Scripps, and
there's not so much emphasis on the seacoing part
of things anymore in Scripps as it used to be. Here,
there's a much more relative emphasis, I think, on
the seagoing aspects of things. Perhaps because
we're isolated down here on the Cape. We're not
associated with a major university except with
MIT in an educational sense. But we don't have any
close physical ties with MIT. And our business is
oceanography down here. That's it, period.
That's the way we get funding. Whereas Scripps is
sort of part now of the big UCSD campus and is more of
a general campus. That's both an advantage and a
disadvantage, because it means that you can't. We
here at Woods Hole, for example, can't draw on the
expertise quickly and easily from other fields,
geophysics or physics, for example, or
chemistry. We have to go to MIT or some other place
to really get involved with people from those
fields. On the other hand, it means we can be
somewhat unfettered. We're not part of a large
research or a large educational institution
which has its rules and regulations. We're a
fairly small institution. And fortunately, we
have the ship facilities here that I think are as
good as anywhere. Probably as good as scriptry and
better. And that's been one of the very attractive
things to me here at Woods Hole, is the emphasis on
seagoing activity and keeping first-class
seagoing activity going. Whereas I think Scripps
has left their seagoing activity dropping,
compared to what I saw when I was there 20 years ago.
And that's unfortunate to some extent, because
Scripps is a wonderful place to do seagoing work.
But there are a lot of other institutions now that
have come along in a much stronger way. Smaller
institutions, but still quite viable ones, such
as University of Hawaii, Texas A&M, University of
Miami,
and Duke University operates the Eastward. So I
think the relative importance has changed
between the smaller institutions and the larger
institutions. And I think the smaller
institutions have a relatively larger influence
in hunk of the pie than they used to back in the old
days. after World War II. It was mainly the major
institutions where the World War II research was
carried out. And that carried over into the
funding, at least for a few years. Yes, I think so.
That's the way I felt. So it's a more pluralistic
kind of activity, divided among more
institutions and more programs. I'm not involved
with it, but Dave Ross down here runs the What
am I trying to say?
The Sea Grant program, which involves all kinds of
applied aspects of research and is a very potent
force now in new avenues for oceanographic
research that are more applied. I guess I'm still a
basic oceanographic research scientist. I don't
get so much involved with the applied aspects. And
I think Woods Hole is still a basic research
institution, although there have been a lot of
pressures lately to get involved with applied
research, and even from the director on down here.
And that's where the new funding is. I think we're
always tempted to get involved with more applied
kind of research programs. But I don't think
anyone claims yet that we know enough about the
basic fundamentals of how the ocean works or how
the earth works to say that we can just do applied
work now. At least I don't feel that way, and I don't
think very many people do. I think Woods Hole and
Scripps and Lamont still have a basic research
orientation, and they're going to contribute a
lot to these applied programs that are going on
now. I don't know how much detail you want on what my
history has been here at Woods Hole. or who I've
known here. Well, now, what I'd like for you to do
now is, now you're reentering work with heat flow.
I'd like for you to talk some about what you did when
you arrived, how you set up your research. What do
you feel as if you discovered in heat flow? How do
you feel like this contributed to the idea of
spreading? What was your reaction when you began
to see the implication of the two? Yeah, this
happened, the idea of seafloor spreading and
plate tectonics, which is sort of the revolution
in our field, really happened about the time I was
over in UNESCO. And I was getting some feedback
from that in the indirect sort of way, but I wasn't
involved directly with, at the time, with the
research that was developing then. You know, the
real evidence came from the magnetic anomalies on
the seafloor. And that came out with Fred Vine and
others about 1965, 1966 period, just when I was
coming back here to Woods Hole. And so that was sort
of a stimulus for us in the geothermal aspects of
things to try to understand what was happening to
the heat flow. Could the heat flow be explained in
the same way? And we knew in a general sense that it
could, because we found these high heat flow
values on ridges. But we didn't understand all the
scattering values. We had a lot of scattering heat
flow data, and still do. And it's only the past few
years where we started to understand the cause of
that
models of hydrothermal circulation. There's
water circulating down in the crust where the
rocks, when they're formed at the ridges, get
pretty well cracked up, probably thermally or
mechanically. So water can circulate down in the
rocks and bring the heat out. And we don't measure
that with our measurements because we measure
only the conductive part of the heat. And so where
we had conductive measurements, we'd get both
high and low values scattered very close
together. We could never understand why that
should exist on the sea floor. Because
theoretically, if everything were conducted, we
should get a uniform decrease of heat flow away
from the ridges as the crust cools. We didn't find
that. So heat flow was not a major contributor to
the development of the idea of sea floor spread. We
had problems and still do have problems
understanding the distribution of heat flow. But
it has contributed more recently in a major way to
the models of the way the plates cool with time.
Because by eliminating, yeah,
of the circulating, what we infer to be a
circulating pattern of water in the earth's crust
in that area. And we've mapped very detailed,
small-scale variations of heat flow there, which
can explain easily all of the scatter that we've
been measuring in the past 20 years, especially in
the ridge crust. There's a lot of interesting
aspects of that that I don't think I need to go into
now here, but that we're trying to develop an
understanding of that hydrothermal circulation
pattern. But we're also trying to understand the
basic cooling of the plates now as a function of
time out to as old as the oceans get. We haven't done
that very well. There's still a lot of scatter in
the data because of the way the data was taken in the
early days. So we're developing a lot of very
specific experiments to understand the heat flow
as a function of age of the ocean crust so we can get a
smooth curve that's connected with the aging of
the plates with time. And that hasn't been easy
because in the early days, right after sea floor
spreading, I think heat flow tended to be
discounted a lot because it wasn't understood. We
didn't understand this aspect of hydrothermal
circulation until about the early 1970s. So
essentially, when I first came back here to Woods
Hole, we were making these long transects for
several years of heat flow right across the
oceans. And it clearly demonstrated that the heat
flow measurements couldn't fit very well to an
idea of sea floor spreading, cooling of a plate in a
simple mode.
But I think these measurements were instrumental
in helping us develop this idea of hydrothermal
circulation in the crust, a mechanism which had
been suspected and not really demonstrated in any
clear way, except by heat flow measurements.
Recently, I think this work on the Galapagos has
demonstrated it fairly clearly that it holds
pretty well. We measured hot water coming out of
the crust, for example, with Albin in a very
detailed survey right at the ridge crest. The
Galapagos was an interesting place to go to
because not only the historical aspects
associated with Darwin's discoveries there. We
also discovered some new biology on the seafloor
associated with these fins, which is
interesting, because Darwin discovered a new
biology on the islands there, and the biological
principles that he expounded in terms of
evolution and things of this sort. Now the marine
biologists are very interested in these new
discoveries on the seafloor in the same area. It's
kind of an interesting connection. So a return to
history. Return to history, so to speak. But we
don't know very much about that biology yet. The
biologists are really excited now and want to get
back to the area in another year or two with the
Alvin submersible to look at things. Alvin is a new
technology that's come along, too, very nicely in
the past few years. Essentially, Woods Hole took
on the burden about when I came back here, a little
before I arrived here, of supporting the research
submersible vessel that could be used by anyone
who wanted to use it in the oceanographic
community had a tough time for a long time
supporting that kind of activity because it
simply didn't have the capabilities to get down to
the deep sea floor where the interesting geology
and geophysics occurred until recently. It
increased its depth capability three, four years
ago to 12,000 feet instead of 6,000. 6,000 feet
eliminated this from all the oceans, except for
the continental shelves. There were very few
people that could do much with the outland on the
continental shelves. Well, there were people
here, sedimentologists and geologists, who were
using it and did use it. Ken Emery, Dave Ross, and
other people used it on the shelves here. But, you
know, it turns out the new, all the driving And a lot
of the driving force, I think, for big funding in
oceanography came from the geological,
geophysical side of things in the deep oceans. It
still does to some extent. I don't think our
revolution has stopped yet, really. Because now
we're working on the problems of understanding
the driving forces associated with plate
tectonics. What makes it go? And we know very
little about it right now. And we're now
developing some long, deep penetrating
experiments, one of which is this
electromagnetic induction studies that I'm
starting to get into, to learn about the depth
structure of the plates and beneath the plates.
What's the material beneath the plates like? How
does it distribute in space and over the motions?
That's just beginning. I think that's going to be a
new story for the next 10 or 15 years. Do you think
that'll, at least in terms of your interest and
specialty, you think that'll be the direction of
oceanography? That'll be one direction of
oceanography. I think we're going to see several
directions in oceanography over the next few
years. I think it's perhaps like the
proliferation of the field itself. We're going to
see several major directions in oceanography.
What are they? Well, one is associated with the
ocean waters themselves. The physical
oceanographers are sort of having a revolution by
themselves right now in terms of understanding
the details of the circulating patterns of
currents in the oceans and the time scales of the
circulations and the flow of energy, sort of the
climate in the ocean, so to speak, and the way it
interacts with the climate in the atmosphere. I
think there's a lot of evidence now that the
oceans' distribution of temperatures and ocean
waters controls what happens over the
continents. Yes. To a large extent, you probably
talk to people at Scripps about this, because
they're very much involved with that, because it
looks like the Pacific Ocean is probably the
controlling factor on the weather over the United
States.
of these new biological communities in the
Galapagos. What do those mean in terms of
evolution of creatures on the seafloor? These
vents that were observed, hot water vents on the
Galapagos, are only a few thousand years old. And
here we have new creatures that have probably been
developed there in this period of a few thousand
years that don't exist elsewhere outside of those
areas. How did they develop? Where did they come
from? How do they get introduced? How do they live?
What do they live on down there? There's a lot of
theories going around right now about sulfur
reducing bacteria and how they contribute to the
food chain at the seafloor from these vent areas.
It may be very localized, but they may have some
long ranging aspects or implications for the
development of sea life in the ocean. I don't know.
That's a story that biologists need to tell, and I
think probably will be taught. And then in our
field, in geological oceanography, I think the
big push is going to be to understand the driving
forces behind plate tectonics. What are the
deeper motions that are going on? How fast are
they? How are they distributed? Do we have big
convection cells under the Earth? Where are they?
What is their time scale? What drives these
motions in the air? Is it heat coming from the
interior that drives them? If so, why? Where are
the heat sources in the air? These will be
difficult problems to get at. We may not be able to
answer them unambiguously because we can't get
down there and sample things. 100 kilometers
down, how are we going to sample it? But the tools we
have are geophysical. Heat flow,
electromagnetic, seismic, All of these indirect
methods are going to be the ways in which we learn
about this, and I suspect I'm going to be involved
with that probably for the rest of my career here in
oceanography. So, in a sense, my early heat flow
work is being generalized into a more broader
geophysical description of how the Earth works.
I've been studying it in the oceans, peripherally
on the continents, but I think that's... the
relationship we see now. And we want to tie the
oceans and the continents together when we make
this kind of a study. How do the continental masses
react to these sea floor spreading forces that are
going on? It may turn out that a lot of the activity
or organization of research in the oceans will be
now applied to the continents. The continents are
much more difficult to understand in many ways,
even though we're living right on top of them and
have access to them. So it may be that many of these
geophysical methods, big geophysical programs,
can now be applied to continental areas to
understand the deep structure there.